Toward the end of his life,
Joshua assembled all the tribes of Israel
and gave a moving farewell speech.
In it, he recounted
how Jehovah protected them.
Listen to his conclusion
as recorded at Joshua 24:14, 15:
“Therefore, fear Jehovah
“and serve him
with integrity and faithfulness,
“and remove the gods
that your forefathers served
“on the other side of the River
and in Egypt,
“and serve Jehovah.
“Now if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah,
“choose for yourselves today
whom you will serve,
“whether the gods
that your forefathers served
“on the other side of the River
“or the gods of the Amorites
in whose land you are dwelling.
“But as for me and my household,
we will serve Jehovah.”
Did Joshua motivate his listeners?
Verse 16 says:
“At this the people answered:
“‘It is unthinkable for us
to abandon Jehovah
and to serve other gods.’”
Verse 31 adds
that “Israel continued to serve Jehovah
“all the days of Joshua
and all the days
of the elders who outlived Joshua.”
This teaches us something
about how we can conclude
a discussion effectively.
Our final words
should connect to the overall topic,
motivate our listeners,
and be simple and brief.
Let’s watch
the following conclusion of a public talk.
So, brothers, during these
“critical times hard to deal with,”
let’s follow the counsel in today’s talk,
because with Jehovah’s help,
we can endure life’s challenges.
And when he brings an end
to this world and all its problems,
we’ll survive to live forever
in a beautiful Paradise.
What do you think?
Did the speaker connect
his conclusion to the overall topic?
Could you identify the theme
of his talk from this conclusion?
And while it’s good that the speaker
tried to motivate his audience,
was he specific?
Did he speak with a note of finality?
Let’s give him another chance.
So, brothers,
although we live “in times of distress,”
may we always remember
how Jehovah helps us.
He offers us his powerful holy spirit,
he provides support
through our loving Christian brotherhood,
and he gives us a hope.
Therefore, when facing trials,
let’s ‘throw our burdens on Jehovah,’
confident that ‘he will sustain us.’
This time, the speaker rephrased the theme
“Where Can You Get Help
in Times of Distress?”
and he restated the talk’s three main points.
He motivated his listeners by reminding them
how to benefit from Jehovah’s provisions.
His conclusion was simple and brief.
How might we apply
these principles in the ministry?
In the following example,
a brother named Aaron
is talking to a workmate named Mark,
who recently attended
his grandfather’s funeral.
Aaron sees an opportunity
to witness informally,
so he tells Mark about the resurrection
and shows him John 5:28, 29.
Now, how might Aaron
effectively conclude their conversation?
So Jesus promises
to resurrect those who’ve died.
Interesting.
Well, I guess we’d better get back to work.
Not much of a conclusion, was it?
Let’s watch him try again.
So Jesus promises
to resurrect those who’ve died.
Interesting.
What do you think
that promise means for your grandfather?
In his conclusion,
Aaron connected the topic
of their conversation
to the death of Mark’s grandfather.
But a good conclusion
should also motivate your listeners
and show them what to do
with the information they learned.
Let’s watch the rest of Aaron’s conclusion.
So, Mark, during those times
when your grandfather’s death
makes you especially sad,
think about Jesus’ promise
that death is not the end.
Imagine what it’ll be like
to see your grandfather again.
That helps me when I’m sad
about relatives I’ve lost in death.
Thanks for sharing that.
Sure.
Maybe when we talk next time,
I’ll show you what Jesus said about . . .
Well done!
After repeating the main point
for Mark to remember,
Aaron motivated him to reflect
on the resurrection hope
during times of sadness.
Aaron could have also tried
to motivate Mark to accept a Bible study,
to come with him to a congregation meeting,
or some other specific action.
When your conclusion is effective,
your audience
will remember your theme and main points
and be motivated to apply what they learned.